gh-94635: Add Reference, How-to, and Concepts headings to sqlite3 docs (#94636)
python/cpython: Doc/library/sqlite3.rst

compliant with the DB-API 2.0 specification described by :pep:`249`, and
requires SQLite 3.7.15 or newer.

> 

Reviewer: Do you think it would be useful to have a ToC or even just a sentence with direct links to the main sections?

Something like:
```rst
If you are new to sqlite3, read the :ref:`sqlite3-tutorial`; for information about the objects
and their methods, skip to the :ref:`sqlite3-reference`; if you are trying to solve a particular
issue, check the :ref:`sqlite3-howtos`;  and for more theoretical background on the module,
see the :ref:`sqlites-concepts`.
```

or

```rst
This documented includes four main sections:
* :ref:`sqlite3-tutorial`: teaches how to use the sqlite3 module;
* :ref:`sqlite3-reference`: describes the classes and methods defined in the module;
* :ref:`sqlite3-howtos`: explains how to solve specific problems;
* :ref:`sqlites-concepts`: provides more background and insights about the design of the module;
```

(We might want to standardize this as we start adopting diataxis more widely.)

Author: Definitely; IMO the latter is the best option.

compliant with the DB-API 2.0 specification described by :pep:`249`, and
requires SQLite 3.7.15 or newer.

This document includes four main sections:

> * :ref:`sqlite3-tutorial`: teaches how to use the sqlite3 module

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`sqlite3-tutorial` teaches how to use the sqlite3 module
```

IMO, it reads better and sounds a little friendlier if these are phrased as prose sentences

> * :ref:`sqlite3-reference`: describes the classes and methods defined in the
>   module

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`sqlite3-reference` describes the classes and functions
  this module defines
```

* "methods" -> "functions" since "classes" include "methods" whereas much of the reference docs cover top-level functions
* Reduce wordy repetition
* Phrase as prose sentence

> * :ref:`sqlite3-howtos` explains how to handle specific tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`sqlite3-howtos` details how to handle specific tasks.
```

Avoid ambiguity/confusing in using "explain" for a non-explanation section (didn't catch this the first time, sorry)

> * :ref:`sqlite3-howtos`: explains how to solve specific problems

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`sqlite3-howtos` explains how to handle specific tasks
```

* Tweak wording to mention positive (and more general) "tasks" rather than negative (and not always encompassing) "problems"
* Frame as a prose sentence

Reviewer 2: The singular/plural agreement sounds kinda weird, even if it is technically correct (referring to the singular section rather than the plural guides). I considered proposing referring to the underlying item rather than the section name to avoid this, but decided not to for now. We _could_ reference the guides rather than the section here, but that wouldn't be consistent with the others (especially since Concepts is also a plural word, even if the object it references, a section, is singular, whereas the "guides" are actually multiple distinct objects, just under one section)

Reviewer 2: Or maybe I'm overthinking this, heh

Author: > We could reference the guides rather than the section here [...]

I don't think that is needed, as you've got the ToC menu to your immediate left ;)

Author: I do like the proposed wording, though.

Reviewer 2: > I don't think that is needed, as you've got the ToC menu to your immediate left ;)

Sorry, I didn't mean to imply actually enumerating the guides or anything, but rather the semantic nuance of referring to "How-to guides" the _section_ (singular) versus "How-to guides" the _guides_ (plural)

Author: Ah, got it :)

Author: I'm marking this as resolved. Let me know if you disagree :)

> * :ref:`sqlite3-explanation` provides in-depth understanding of transaction
>   control.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`sqlite3-explanation` provides in-depth background on
  transaction control.
```

Fix grammar and phrasing issues

> * :ref:`sqlite3-concepts`: provides more background and insights about the
>   design of the module

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`sqlite3-concepts` provides more background and insights
  about the module's design
```

* Reword to flow better and be a bit more concise
* Rephrase as a sentence

Author: Actually, I'd like to reword this completely, because it does _not_ talk about the module's design. The only item in "Concepts" is the transaction control explanation. The next upcoming item is the new PEP 249 autocommit transaction control explanation. So, two explanations; no concepts 😆

Author: PTAL

   ``NotSupportedError`` is a subclass of :exc:`DatabaseError`.

.. _sqlite3-guides:

Guides
------

.. _sqlite3-adapters:

Using adapters to store custom Python types in SQLite databases

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: FWIW https://devguide.python.org/documenting/#sections recommends `^^^` after `---`.  I'm not sure how consistent its use is in the docs, and it doesn't matter too much.

Author: Right. Where does `~` belong?

Reviewer 2: It isn't one of the six heading levels defined there (and going deeper than that is likely ill advised)—not the most important, but it does make it easier to move content between documents and keep track of what heading level you are at in the source.

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/sqlite3/converter_point.py

.. _sqlite3-adapter-converter-recipes:

Adapter and Converter Recipes

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: IMO, particularly when framed as Guides/How-tos, it might make more sense to split the adapter and converter recipes/defaults and move them under their respective task-oriented "Using adapters" and "Converting SQLite values" to connect them to the high-level task and make each top-level heading correspond to the task they describe.

Author: I'm not sure about this. This implies we need to split the "default adapters/converters" section as well. They are both very small, so I'm not sure of there is added value for the user.

Author: I'll keep it like it is for this PR. We can always split it up later. Marking this as resolved for this PR.

+-------------+----------------------------------------------+

The type system of the :mod:`sqlite3` module is extensible in two ways: you can
store additional Python types in an SQLite database via
:ref:`object adapters <sqlite3-adapters>`,

> and you can let the :mod:`sqlite3` module convert SQLite types to

Reviewer: Just a minor nit: the module is already linked earlier in the sentence, so this second occurrence could be converted to ` ``sqlite3`` `.  I'm not sure if this convention is followed throughout the document (I saw at least another ` ``sqlite3`` `), and the style guide doesn't seem to mention this.

If the two versions render differently, it might be better to use `:mod:` or just ` ``sqlite3`` ` for both, given that in this case the links points to the document itself and they are not particularly useful.

Reviewer 2: I was going to point this out too; it just slipped my mind for some reason. It seems the convention @erlend-aasland has followed and advocated for (as discussed in the review feedback of one of his other recent PRs) is to just always use regular literals for the module name inside the same module.

The rendering for both (at least under the current theme) is as a literal, just with the `:mod:` role version also being a link (which isn't necessary here), though at least for this particular case it is moot since the convention seems to be just going with a verbatim literal including on first use.

Author: ```suggestion
and you can let the ``sqlite3`` module convert SQLite types to
```

Default adapters and converters
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

There are default adapters for the date and datetime types in the datetime
module. They will be sent as ISO dates/ISO timestamps to SQLite.

The default converters are registered under the name "date" for
:class:`datetime.date` and under the name "timestamp" for
:class:`datetime.datetime`.

This way, you can use date/timestamps from Python without any additional
fiddling in most cases. The format of the adapters is also compatible with the
experimental SQLite date/time functions.

The following example demonstrates this.

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/sqlite3/pysqlite_datetime.py

If a timestamp stored in SQLite has a fractional part longer than 6
numbers, its value will be truncated to microsecond precision by the
timestamp converter.

.. note::

   The default "timestamp" converter ignores UTC offsets in the database and
   always returns a naive :class:`datetime.datetime` object. To preserve UTC
   offsets in timestamps, either leave converters disabled, or register an
   offset-aware converter with :func:`register_converter`.

.. _sqlite3-shortcut-methods:

Using shortcut methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Using the nonstandard :meth:`execute`, :meth:`executemany` and
> :meth:`executescript` methods of the :class:`Connection` object, your code can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the non-standard :meth:`~Connection.execute`,
:meth:`~Connection.executemany` and :meth:`~Connection.executescript`
methods of the :class:`Connection` class, your code can
```

Not directly related, but since I can reach it...

Author: Oh, there's room for improvement there... I'll save that for another PR. And when we touch it, the word "nonstandard" goes. (I want those completely purged from the sqlite3 docs.)

Author: I created #95334

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/sqlite3/ctx_manager.py

.. _sqlite3-concepts:

Concepts
--------

.. _sqlite3-types:

SQLite and Python types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

SQLite natively supports the following types: ``NULL``, ``INTEGER``,
``REAL``, ``TEXT``, ``BLOB``.

The following Python types can thus be sent to SQLite without any problem:

+-------------------------------+-------------+
| Python type                   | SQLite type |
+===============================+=============+
| :const:`None`                 | ``NULL``    |

> +-------------------------------+-------------+

Reviewer 2: Arguably, this may be more reference material than an explanation/concepts, since it simply states the Python data types supported by the `sqlite3` module and what SQLite types they are converted to in a highly succinct, structured and information-oriented way, per the definition of Reference material:

> Reference guides are technical descriptions of the machinery and how to operate it. Reference material is information-oriented.

> The only purpose of a reference guide is to describe, as succinctly as possible, and in an orderly way.

> Reference material should be austere and to the point. One hardly reads reference material; one consults it.

and contains little to no high-level discussion, as is emblematic of explanation/concepts:

> Explanation is discussion that clarifies and illuminates a particular topic. Explanation is understanding-oriented.

> It’s not a close-up view of the machinery, like reference material. It’s documentation that approaches a topic from a higher perspective, and from different angles.

> This allows explanation to become discussion, a more relaxed, freer way to consider something. Explanation joins things together. It’s documentation that it makes sense to read while away from the product itself.

On the other hand, this does mean that there's only one top-level item in this category, and perhaps this section could be expanded with more explanation and background of the various types.

Author: > Arguably, this may be more reference material than an explanation/concepts [...]

Yeah, you are right. This is more of a reference than an explanation.

> On the other hand, this does mean that there's only one top-level item in this category, and perhaps this section could be expanded with more explanation and background of the various types.

That should not be a problem :)

| SQLite type | Python type                                  |
+=============+==============================================+
| ``NULL``    | :const:`None`                                |
+-------------+----------------------------------------------+
| ``INTEGER`` | :class:`int`                                 |
+-------------+----------------------------------------------+
| ``REAL``    | :class:`float`                               |
+-------------+----------------------------------------------+
| ``TEXT``    | depends on :attr:`~Connection.text_factory`, |
|             | :class:`str` by default                      |
+-------------+----------------------------------------------+
| ``BLOB``    | :class:`bytes`                               |
+-------------+----------------------------------------------+

The type system of the :mod:`sqlite3` module is extensible in two ways: you can
store additional Python types in an SQLite database via
:ref:`object adapters <sqlite3-adapters>`,
and you can let the :mod:`sqlite3` module convert SQLite types to
Python types via :ref:`converters <sqlite3-converters>`.

.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

> Controlling Transactions
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transaction Control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Concept-oriented rather than task-oriented, reflecting both the Diataxis content type and the actual focus of the section

   sqlite3.register_converter("timestamp", convert_timestamp)

> .. _sqlite3-connection-shortcuts:

Reviewer 2: Just a general comment—in the future, it would be best to just leave the existing ref target in place (either instead of or addition to adding a new one), since not doing so moots much of the point of using ref targets in the first place—it requires unnecessarily changing all the existing inbound links, has a high chance of breaking some regardless (in a large doc repo like CPython that doesn't use `-n`), breaks any inbounds by external repos using intersphinx, and also breaks any normal hyperlinks linked to the `ref` target `<span>` instead of the page heading (e.g. via copying an internal inbound link).

Seems like it would be worth me opening a docs community issue or just a PR directly to the devguide to mention this (which it doesn't)? To note, the devguide currently also doesn't mention (in either the style guide or the reST Markup page under [Cross Links](https://devguide.python.org/documentation/markup/#doc-ref-role)) how ref targets should be "namespaced", i.e. by the module or page name, which is more generally useful than just repeating the basics of how to use them already covered in the Sphinx quick reference or the reST docs.

@ezio-melotti thoughts?

Author: Yes, sorry 'bout that :(

Author: I'm not sure it is worth reverting that particular change; that anchor was introduced very recently.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough, that is an exception—though I'm not sure if it was used somewhere in a NEWS entry, etc.

Author: I'll have a look! **UPDATE**: Seems not. Anyway, I'll be more careful in the future. Thanks for the heads-up.

Reviewer: @CAM-Gerlach:
> @ezio-melotti thoughts?

A bigger problem is that AFAIU changing ref targets also breaks anchors.  I.e., https://docs.python.org/3.12/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3-shortcut-methods no longer works after the ref name has been changed.  For this specific case it's probably not an issue, but it's something to keep in mind when updating/moving references.

Reviewer 2: I opened python/devguide#927 to document this

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/sqlite3/ctx_manager.py

.. _sqlite3-uri-tricks:

> SQLite URI tricks
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Working with SQLite URIs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Frame this as a how-to

Some useful URI tricks include:

* Open a database in read-only mode::

    con = sqlite3.connect("file:template.db?mode=ro", uri=True)

* Do not implicitly create a new database file if it does not already exist;
  will raise :exc:`~sqlite3.OperationalError` if unable to create a new file::

    con = sqlite3.connect("file:nosuchdb.db?mode=rw", uri=True)

* Create a shared named in-memory database::

    con1 = sqlite3.connect("file:mem1?mode=memory&cache=shared", uri=True)
    con2 = sqlite3.connect("file:mem1?mode=memory&cache=shared", uri=True)
    con1.execute("create table t(t)")
    con1.execute("insert into t values(28)")
    con1.commit()
    rows = con2.execute("select * from t").fetchall()

More information about this feature, including a list of parameters,
can be found in the `SQLite URI documentation`_.

.. _SQLite URI documentation: https://www.sqlite.org/uri.html

.. _sqlite3-explanation:

Concepts

> --------

Reviewer 2: Did you mean to change the actual heading as well?

```suggestion
Explanation
-----------
```

.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

Transaction control
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``sqlite3`` module does not adhere to the transaction handling recommended
by :pep:`249`.

If the connection attribute :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level`

> is not :const:`None`,

Reviewer: Not your fault since you are just moving an existing, but for `None`, ` ``None`` ` is preferred.  This might belong in a different PR though, assuming you think it's worth fixing it.

Reviewer 2: To note, I don't have a strong opinion, but ``:const:`None` `` is the general convention that @erlend-aasland has used so far through the revamped ``sqlite3`` docs, so it might be better to make this change separately if so. Is there somewhere this preference is documented?

Author: Oh, I was not aware of that convention; I've been using the reference version consistently in all my PRs. Is that also the convention for True and False?

Author: Changing all those in sqlite3.rst would be a large diff :) _If_ I were to do that, I prefer to do it in a separate PR.

Author: I'm going to mark this as resolved, as I won't be making any changes in this PR. I'll wait a little bit, in case other comments appear, though.

Reviewer 2: Seems like its discussed in the [devguide](https://devguide.python.org/documentation/markup/#rest-inline-markup), but under the "reStructuredText Markup" page rather than the style guide, which mostly repeats general details of reST/Sphinx, and under the ``keyword`` role rather than the ``const`` role in which they are actually indexed under

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/181997304-0ec729f5-9dbf-4aed-b3d8-1b7971753eec.png)

Author: Ok, makes sense. Thanks for finding this.

Author: We should probably move that to the style guide.

Author: I consider it low priority, though :)

Reviewer: > Is that also the convention for True and False?

See also https://github.com/python/devguide/pull/916, where I tried to make this more explicit.
